Introduction

Somatic stem cells, often referred to as adult stem cells, engage in the maintenance of tissues through homeostatic turnover and in the repair of tissues through regenerative responses. As such, these stem cell populations must have evolved mechanisms to sustain themselves over the scaled lifespans of organisms whose tissues they maintain,1 and yet, as organisms of different lifespans age, the decline of these stem cell functions is apparent in terms of impaired tissue homeostasis and regeneration in response to injury or disease.2,3,4,5
In this review, we describe key functional hallmarks of stem cells that change with age (Figure 1). We have focused on functional aspects as opposed to molecular characteristics or proposed drivers for several reasons. First, the key drivers of cellular aging, such as genomic instability, altered proteostasis, mitochondrial dysfunction, and epigenetic changes,6 affect all cells. As such, stem cell aging is not unique in terms of molecular and functional drivers. Second, the molecular features of aged stem cells differ from tissue to tissue, with some themes emerging but tremendous variability among stem cell populations. Most importantly, we wanted to focus on functional hallmarks that are either unique to stem cell physiology or at least are key defining features related to the role that stem cells play in tissue homeostasis and repair. These functional hallmarks manifest at the single-cell level, at the population level, or both. Notably, the hallmarks of stem cell aging are at the intersection of the hallmarks of stem cells and those of aging,6,7 highlighting features at that interface.
Although there are many types of stem cells throughout the body, and even multiple subtypes within individual tissues and organs, we will focus on the populations that have received the most scrutiny in terms of their age-related functional changes. Those populations include hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), neural stem cells (NSCs), muscle stem cells (MuSCs), intestinal stem cells (ISCs), and a variety of stem cells in the skin, including epidermal stem cells (EpSCs), melanocyte stem cells (McSCs), and hair follicle stem cells (HFSCs). We will also focus primarily on stem cell aging in mammalian systems since they account for most of the studies in this area.
Before we expand upon each hallmark individually, there are several considerations worth raising that relate to many stem cell populations. First, we note that somatic stem cells are responsible for both homeostatic maintenance and regeneration of a wide variety of tissues. However, these two functions may be quite distinct. Stem cell proliferation associated with tissue homeostasis is generally continuous and occurs in absence of any trigger from cellular injury. By contrast, tissue repair and regeneration in response to damage (e.g., in the setting of trauma, ischemia, and other injuries) typically elicit an acute, transient, and potentially massive regenerative response. In those settings, stem cell-mediated repair occurs in a more complex microenvironment that includes inflammation and cellular debris associated with tissue necrosis. Thus, age-related changes in stem cell functions may differentially impact the homeostatic versus regenerative/repair aspects of stem cell activity.
Aspects of the hallmarks of aging stem cells may be cell intrinsic, may arise from cell-extrinsic influences, or a combination of the two. Intrinsic changes would reflect molecular alterations acquired by the stem cell as a result of the passage of time. These would include somatic mutations that are essentially irreversible and might affect stem cell function. Epigenetic changes that perdure over time would also be an example of an intrinsic change. Extrinsic influences would relate to the changes in the stem cell niches and the systemic environment. For example, aging is accompanied by a general increase in inflammation. This aged inflammatory environment affects the output or behavior of stem cells. Likewise, the accumulation of senescent cells in the stem cell niche may negatively impact stem cell function via paracrine factors. In principle, these effects could be largely reversible if the environment were modified, for example by reducing inflammation or eliminating senescent cells.
With these premises, considerations, and caveats, we turn to the descriptions of the hallmarks of stem cell aging. For each hallmark, we provide representative examples of how they change with age in one or more stem cell compartments rather than provide an exhaustive list for all stem cell compartments. The hallmarks that we have selected to highlight reflect fundamental characteristics of stem cell function (Figure 1): (1) depth of quiescence, (2) self-renewal propensity, (3) fate of progeny, (4) resilience, and (5) population heterogeneity. These functions play key roles in the typical stem cell lineage progression from quiescence to differentiation (Figure 2).
Hallmarks of stem cell aging

As we embark on a description of the hallmarks of stem cell aging, one recurring theme is that aging may result in either an increase (in a kind of “gain-of-function” mode) or a decrease (in a kind of “loss-of-function” mode), each of which results in an impairment of stem cell functionality. These examples only highlight the balance of inputs that are required for effective stem-cell-mediated tissue homeostasis and repair. Another recurrent theme is the extent to which any single hallmark highlighted is characteristic of individual stem cells (e.g., depth of quiescence) or is instead a characteristic of the population (e.g., heterogeneity). The latter emphasizes the complex interactions between heterogeneous populations of stem cells as well as between stem cells and their environment to produce complex differentiated tissues.
One obvious change that occurs in many stem cell populations with age affects the number of stem cells in the tissue as quantified by in situ analyses, such as by immunostaining, or by ex vivo analyses, such as by flow cytometry or single-cell-based “omics” approaches. As cell number is not a functional readout, we have not listed changes in numbers as a key hallmark of stem cell aging. Rather, we have focused on functions, such as self-renewal or mechanisms of resilience, whose change with age can result in either a loss of stem cells or an increase in the stem cell pool size.
Changes in depth of quiescence

Most somatic stem cell populations (e.g., HSCs, NSCs, MuSCs, and HFSCs) persist in a quiescent state. They rarely divide, only then giving rise to proliferating progenitors (often called “transit amplifying” [TA] cells) that sustain tissues during homeostasis and have the capacity for extensive proliferation during regeneration. Quiescence is a state of cell cycle withdrawal, which, unlike terminal differentiation or senescence, is readily reversible.8 Thus, quiescent stem cells can exit the quiescent state and enter the cell cycle, while some fraction of their progeny return to quiescence via self-renewal. The quiescence state, with its lower and unique metabolic activity (e.g., dependency on fatty acid oxidation [FAO]),9,10,11 allows for the persistence of stem cell populations in tissues over the lifespan of an organism, a feature that is particularly important in long-lived organisms, such as humans.
There are notable exceptions to the generalization of stem cell populations persisting in a quiescent state. Both ISCs and EpSCs persist in a state of continuous proliferation and appear to be able to generate progeny with negligible decline during aging.12,13,14 The mechanisms by which these cells are able to sustain seemingly unlimited proliferative potential without undergoing replicative senescence or substantial decline in proliferative output remains a mystery.
For many quiescent stem cell populations, alterations in the depth of the quiescent state with age have been reported. These states include deeper quiescence in which the kinetics of activation are slower and more shallow quiescence in which the kinetics of activation are accelerated (Figure 3). In muscle, there is an emergence of a subset of MuSCs that exhibit a deeper quiescent state with age,15 and this state is associated with impaired muscle regeneration. This subset was found to have lower levels of glutathione, and the restoration of glutathione levels could rescue this aging phenotype.15 However, there is also evidence of a population of aged MuSCs that exhibit a shallower state of quiescence, entering the cell cycle readily and failing to self-renew, thus contributing to the decline in MuSC numbers with age.16 The loss of quiescence maintenance among this MuSC subpopulation is due to an increase in FGF2 secreted into the MuSC niche from muscle fibers.16 Inducing a shallow state of quiescence, termed GAlert,17 by enhancing mTOR signaling leads to depletion not only of MuSCs, but also of ISCs and stem cells in the trachea.18 Bulk RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis of MuSCs exhibiting these different states of quiescence have revealed distinct transcriptomic signatures.15,17 Single-cell RNA-seq analysis of MuSCs in different experimental states, which have been done extensively,19,20 are likely to reveal subsets of cells in different depths of quiescence by their transcriptomic profiles. A continuum of intermediate states probably exists between quiescence and activation, adding complexity to the changes in the depth of quiescence to stem cell aging.21,22
In the brain, quiescent NSCs are found primarily in two specific regions—the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus and the subventricular zone (SVZ) along the walls of the lateral ventricles. There is evidence that deeper NSC quiescence is one process that prevents NSC activation and leads to reduced neurogenesis with age in the SVZ and hippocampus.23,24,25 This increase in quiescence depth is in part a result of signals from the NSC niche, including the Wnt antagonist sFRP5. Blocking those niche signals restores aged neurogenesis back toward youthful levels. The suppression of NSC activation out of the quiescent state may also be a result of inflammatory signals originating from T cell infiltration into the aged NSC niche or changes in metabolism.26,27 Interestingly, sub-populations appear to be in shallower quiescence (“resting”) and deeper quiescence (“dormant”), with the former contributing more actively to neurogenesis in the young brain but the latter accounting for persisting, albeit lower, levels of neurogenesis at older ages.25,28,29 Cells in deeper quiescence exhibit gene expression changes in several pathways associated with aging, including changes in inflammation, metabolism, proteostasis, and DNA repair.25 In the hippocampus, deepening quiescence of the dormant NSCs with age correlates with the decreased expression of ASCL1, a gene required for the activation of a pool of NSCs.30 Moreover, chronic in vivo imaging shows that aging reduces the clonal output of each individual NSCs, by increasing quiescence.31 In the SVZ, lineage tracing also revealed increased quiescence of a pool of NSCs.24
For HSCs, the niche is the bone marrow stroma, with several specialized cell types that support stem or progenitor cells, particularly endothelial cells and perivascular leptin-receptor-positive cells.32 These niche cells produce stem cell factor and the chemokine CXCL12, which are important for the maintenance of HSCs.33,34 Among the many changes that occur in the HSC population with age is a reduced growth factor responsiveness.35 This altered responsiveness manifests not only as a reduced proliferative response, but also as a delay in reactivation after the exit of quiescence and subsequent first division, consistent with the idea of a deeper quiescent state. These changes were found to be correlated with a preferential reduction in Akt signaling in aged HSCs.35 More broadly, changes in the cellular composition of the niche with age may affect the function and activity of HSCs. For example, increases in adipocytes in the aging bone marrow can increase inflammation, which is known to negatively affect HSCs. Similarly, age-related changes that affect the proportion of megakaryocytes could influence HSCs through secretion of different factors.
Changes of self-renewal propensity

Changes in the propensity of stem cells to undergo self-renewal (Figure 4) reflect a special example of an alteration of the fate of stem cell progeny. Typically, the self-renewal process is a result of the asymmetric division of a stem or progenitor cell.36,37 Self-renewal ensures the preservation of the stem cell pool rather than generation of specialized tissue. Therefore, abnormalities of self-renewal may account for increases or decreases in stem cell numbers as organisms age.
With age, HSCs exhibit an increased propensity to self-renew at the expense of differentiation,38,39 resulting in a gradual increase in the size of the long-term HSC pool. At the same time, there is a gradual decrease in the functional regeneration capacity of stem cells on a per stem cell basis, measured by competitive bone marrow transplantation assays.40 The net effect is an overall maintenance of stem cell activity across the pool. Importantly, some of the functional activity lost with age can be regained when stem cells are placed in a young environment by transplantation; however, much of the decline in activity appears difficult to be reversed by the milieu alone.41 This apparent increase in stem cell numbers may be driven by somatic mutations (e.g., in Dnmt3a or Tet2 that increase self-renewal and impair differentiation).42 Likewise, environmental changes can promote the expansion of some stem cell subtypes over others. The overall outcome may appear similar in terms of increased stem cell numbers, but the mechanisms (several of which are possible with aging) may have different implications. For example, stem cell expansion due to mutations that cause clonal hematopoiesis (CH) is accompanied by a higher risk of malignancy development and other aging-associated diseases.43
Adult neurogenesis is maintained by symmetric self-renewal and differentiation.44 With age, NSCs exhibit an increased propensity for asymmetric division in the SVZ.24 Aging is also accompanied by a decrease in neural progenitor proliferation.45 NSC self-renewal potential declines with age, and contributes to the reduction of NSCs in the aged brain.46 This is due, among many other changes, to a gradual decline in the expression of the transcriptional regulator Hmga2 which, in young mice, promotes NSC self-renewal by reducing the expression of the tumor suppressors, p16Ink4a and p19Arf.46 Indeed, age-dependent increase in p16Ink4a expression reduces NSC progenitor proliferation.47
It should be noted that different tissues use different mechanisms to maintain or renew their quiescent stem cell populations, and the impact of aging on these processes has not been well studied. For example, in the intestine in addition to the continuously proliferating ISCs, there is another population of stem cells, the so-called “+4 cells,”48 that are quiescent and serve as a reserve population under conditions of increased regenerative demand. To date, no comparable quiescent population has been identified in the epidermis. Nevertheless, this model of a tissue having a population of rapidly proliferating progenitors, which themselves possess potential for both self-renewal and differentiation, as well as a population of dormant reserve cells, may be a common mechanism. The intestine also seems to have a parallel mechanism to replenish differentiated cells. Tuft cells are differentiated cells in the epithelium capable of giving rise to stem-like cells.49 There are other examples of more differentiated epithelial cells that can revert back to a more stem-like state,50 suggesting that various tissues may have evolved mechanisms for replacing quiescent stem cells or maintaining tissue repair even without replenishing the stem cell pool. A report about the dynamics of McSCs in the skin suggests dormant stem cells self-renew by first giving rise to a proliferative population of TA cells, which, while generating more differentiated melanocyte progeny, also give rise to rare cells that will return to dormancy and migrate to the stem cell niche.51 How these various processes are altered during organismal aging has not been studied in detail.
Altered cell fate

One of the most-studied features of aging stem cell populations is the impairment of tissue homeostasis or repair because of altered differentiation trajectories of stem cell progeny. These age-related changes can manifest as skewed differentiation or aberrant gain of an alternative differentiation potential. In either case, the resulting progeny represent populations that differ in old tissues compared with young. A change in self-renewal potential was already discussed previously. In some cases, we have highlighted cell-extrinsic changes in the stem cell niche or systemic environment that contribute to the changes in progeny cell fate in aged animals. However, it is likely that all cases of altered fates of stem cell progeny are due to a combination of cell-intrinsic changes and external factors.
Skewing of differentiation fates

In multipotent stem cells, progeny typically differentiate along a normal distribution, but this distribution can change with age (Figure 5A). One common age-associated change in the population of stem cell progeny occurs in the hematopoietic system, although this is not strictly a change in cell fate of individual cells. HSCs are now known to represent a pool of cells with slightly different propensities. With age, myeloid cell production increases, whereas lymphoid production decreases, thus contributing to a variety of hematologic disorders.38,52,53,54,55
In the adult hippocampus, where NSCs give rise to neurons and other cells, such as astrocytes, the differentiation potential becomes skewed with age. Through a series of asymmetric cell divisions, neural progenitors exhibit a decline in the generation of new neurons and a conversion into astrocytes, which represent a terminal state of differentiation.56 Thus, the age-related decline in neurogenesis is accompanied by an increase in the formation of new astrocytes.57 In aged ISCs, there is a skewing of differentiation toward more secretory cells (goblet and Paneth cells).58 This altered differentiation trajectory is associated with a loss of Wnt signaling in ISCs, and restoration of Wnt signaling can rescue this aging phenotype in the intestine.58
Abnormal cell fates

In addition to the skewing of normal fates of multipotent adult stem cells, aging may also be associated with aberrant cell fates as stem cells exit quiescence and proliferate (Figure 5B). Below, we highlight two specific categories—when stem cells adopt aberrant lineages and when they undergo malignant transformation. We end this section with a discussion of how senescence in the stem cell niche or even in distant tissues may negatively impact stem cell function.
Aberrant lineages

In muscle, aging leads to an increased propensity of MuSCs to adopt a fibrogenic lineage, losing their myogenic potential and contributing to age-related fibrosis.59 The increased stiffness of aged extracellular matrix drives MuSC fibrogenic conversion.60 This propensity is reversible as heterochronic parabiosis can restore the myogenic potential of an aged MuSC population back toward levels seen in young animals.59 MuSCs also have a tendency to activate an adipogenic programs with age,61 although this does not seem to contribute to intramuscular fat accumulation as seen in aged muscle.
In the bone marrow niche for HSCs, mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) support hematopoiesis.62 With age, these MSCs increasingly give rise to adipocytes,63 contributing to the increased fatty marrow that is observed in aged individuals. In addition, aged MSCs also progressively produce cells that adopt senescent phenotypes.64 These aberrant fates are associated with widespread changes in the MSC epigenome.65
In aging mice and the non-human primate, the gray mouse lemur, the decrease in neurogenesis from NSCs in the SVZ is accompanied by an increase in the generation of oligodendrocyte precursors, a fate that is rarely observed in young animals.66 In both species, this change in cell fate propensity is accompanied by an increase in myelin content in the corpus callosum. Aged HSCs also produce higher numbers of aberrant megakaryocytes that arise in parallel to the normal production of platelets.54 These abnormal platelets can lead to increased thrombosis in vivo.
Malignant transformation

Cancer is largely a disease of aging. How stem cells contribute to cancer with age is an ongoing area of interest. Broadly, cancer requires the acquisition of genetic and/or epigenetic changes within a long-lived cell that eventually leads to transformation. Stem and progenitor cells are generally the longest-lived cells that still retain the capacity to divide. For this reason, they are thought to be a reservoir for the emergence of cancer (Figure 5C). Consistent with the notion of the stem cell being a key component is the correlation between common malignancies and tissues with high stem cell turnover.67
Importantly, many mutations in genes that drive clonal expansion (and loss of heterogeneity, discussed below) also contribute to the development of malignancies over time. For example, mutations in DNMT3A are the most frequent driver of CH, and these mutations are also considered to be a major driver of several hematologic malignancies.68 Mutations in DNMT3A can arise in HSCs decades earlier than development of malignancies. The mutation is thought to drive an expansion of the HSC pool,69,70 providing a larger target population for secondary hits to act on, as well as altering the cells epigenetically and metabolically to enhance the likelihood of transformation. Still, secondary and tertiary mutations, such as in NPM1 and FLT3, are required for the development of acute myeloid leukemia.71
Similarly, mutations in TP53, found in non-malignant progenitor expansions in many tissues, often contribute to cancer development. Cells bearing the TP53 mutation are found circulating in blood cell progeny years before the malignancies develop.72 Environmental exposures favor the survival and expansion of TP53-mutant clones over WT clones, ultimately leading to fulminant growth with cells carrying numerous additional genetic lesions thought to contribute to transformation. Similarly, stem cells bearing TET2 or DNMT3A mutations are more resilient to inflammation, such that in an inflammatory environment (found in aging or other pathologic states), those variant cells are more able to expand and outcompete WT counterparts.73
While less well studied outside the hematopoietic system, these principles likely hold in other tissues. For example, normal human endometrial tissue consists of multiple glands generated via stem cells. The stem cells slowly accumulate mutations (∼29/year), which then contribute to the glands.74 Many of the genes which accumulate mutations are thought to have the potential to contribute to malignancy development. However, despite accruing on the order of 1,500 mutations by the fifth decade of life, with many glands having known cancer-driver mutations in genes such as KRAS or PIK3CA, endometrial cancer is relatively rare, and the malignancies have around five times the number of mutations. Additional processes are likely necessary to drive malignancy, the seeds of which originate in the stem cells that regenerate the endometrial glands. Similarly, in mouse models, malignant astrocytomas can originate from neuronal stem cells,75 and different CNS progenitors may lead to distinct glioblastoma subtypes.76
Importantly, the aging environment clearly promotes malignancies, but the mechanisms are still unclear. Experimental models with enforced oncogene expression in stem cells give rise to tumors infrequently when introduced into young progenitors, but at high rates when transplanted into old progenitors, or in young progenitors with an old cellular milieu. This finding indicates an interaction of intrinsic and extrinsic environments in transformation.77 Similarly, when cancer-associated mutations are induced sequentially, the arising malignancy can be more aggressive if there is more time between the first and second mutation,78 demonstrating a time-dependent, or environment-associated, effect on the type of malignancy.
In sum, cancer arising from stem cells is influenced by multiple factors, including the time needed to accumulate deleterious mutations. However, even when those mutations are present, additional factors, both genetic and environmental, are needed for transformation. This is a rich and relatively under-explored area that could lead to therapeutic approaches that reduce the risk of cancer.
Senescence

One of the challenges when reviewing literature on senescence is terminology. The term “senescence” is now commonly used to describe aging phenotypes, as opposed to the original meaning (which we will refer to as “replicative senescence”), which described the phenotype of irreversible cell cycle withdrawal79 and the adoption of specific biochemical profiles.80 This conflation is exemplified by the increasing use of the term “senescence” to refer to aging phenotypes of post-mitotic cells.81,82 The absence of definitive markers of replicative senescent cells exacerbates this problem. A particular challenge is the characterization of rare stem cells or their progeny, but there is little evidence in any tissue that quiescent stem cells adopt senescent phenotypes without first entering the cell cycle. Furthermore, the ability to rejuvenate aged stem cell populations lends further support to the negligible amount of replicative senescence among aged stem cell populations.1
By contrast, the increased burden of senescent and inflammatory cells in the aging stem cell niche contributes to the overall inflammatory milieu.1,83 Senescence and inflammation are inextricably linked when considering the biology of the aging stem cell niche.83 Single-cell RNA-seq analysis of aged NSCs, MuSCs, and HSCs and their respective niches highlighted the prominent inflammation associated with age-related stem cell dysfunction.84 In muscle, senescent cells in the niche impair aged MuSC function.85 In NSCs, the increased inflammation is linked to interferon and CXCL10 signaling.23,26 In the hippocampus, neuroblasts exhibit markers of the senescence-associated phenotype in the aging brain.86 Aged skeletal stem cells not only respond to inflammatory signals with loss of function but also themselves contribute to the inflammatory milieu of the aged bone marrow.87
Altered resilience (survivability)

Cellular resilience describes the ability of a cell to deal with different forms of stress by inducing compensatory responses to maintain homeostasis. In the context of stem cell aging, we will focus primarily on the age-related loss of resilience that increases the likelihood of cell death in response to physiological or pathological stresses. Although not unique to stem cells, we include this among the hallmarks of stem cell aging because a decrease of resilience may contribute to the decline of a stem cell population over time, independently of changes in the other hallmarks. It may also account for an age-related decline in the outcome of key assays of stem cell function, such as transplantation. While the success of a stem cell transplantation experiment depends on features such as proliferative potential and self-renewal potential, the stem cells first need to survive the transplantation process. In that sense, resilience may be the primary characteristic that determines the success of stem cell transplantations.
In an early study of stem cell aging, age-related morphological changes in the mouse intestine were associated with a marked increase in stem cell apoptosis in response to low doses of irradiation.88 This loss of resilience was associated with a decreased regenerative potential of aged ISCs, a defect that could be reversed by restoring Wnt signaling in aged ISCs back to youthful levels.58
In MuSCs, an age-related loss of resilience after reactivation from quiescence leads to a form of cell death known as mitotic catastrophe, in which cells die during mitosis.89,90 This type of cell death is typically caused by unrepaired DNA lesions that interfere with the replicative machinery. With age, MuSCs exhibit a marked increase in mitotic catastrophe during a regenerative response, leading to a reduction of differentiated progeny and an even greater reduction of self-renewed MuSCs.89 Consequently, the tissue responds less effectively to injuries because of a decline of the stem cell pool. The increase in mitotic catastrophe with age is caused by a decline in MuSC-mediated Notch signaling in the regenerative niche in a p53-dependent manner.89
In the hippocampus, in vivo imaging uncovered selective death of NSC progeny during aging in homeostatic conditions,31 and it is likely that NSC death is further increased in response to injury in old brains. NSCs induce the activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) pathway to promote survival associated with stresses of aging.91 ATF4 is essential for maintaining the glutathione pool to protect NSCs from mitochondrial dysfunction.
Differences in resilience among variant HSC clones could account for some of the loss of heterogeneity in the hematopoietic system. Acquisition of mutations in protein phosphatase Mn2+/Mg2+-dependent 1D (PPM1D) and Snf2 related CREBBP activator protein (SRCAP) enhance the resistance of HSCs to environmental insults.92,93 They show lower rates of apoptosis than other HSCs, which ultimately leads to their relative expansion in the HSC pool.
Interestingly, stem cell aging may also be associated with a gain of resilience. In mice, the age-related decline in hematopoiesis is due to the accumulation of dysfunctional HSCs that outcompete less resilient, functional HSCs.94 This accumulation of dysfunctional HSCs, in turn, is driven by metabolic reprogramming. Through the increase of succinate dehydrogenase assembly factor 1 (SDHAF1) over time, HSCs become less dependent on glycolysis for ATP production and more resistant to oxidative stress.94
Changes in population heterogeneity

One stem cell hallmark that changes with age and can only be assessed with population studies is heterogeneity (Figure 6). As with other hallmarks included here, heterogeneity can either increase or decrease with age. Most cellular populations in the body show increased heterogeneity with age,95 and this increase in heterogeneity is associated with a wide variety of causes, including accumulation of mutations in genomic and mitochondrial DNA, epigenetic changes, and loss of homeostatic mechanisms in processes such as autophagy, protein quality control, and RNA processing.1,3,96,97,98 Likewise, stem cells exhibit an increase in genetic heterogeneity with age and they accumulate somatic mutations over time that give each stem cell a unique genetic fingerprint, which may affect its function.99,100,101 This process can lead to increased heterogeneity in all of the functional hallmarks described. In general, most stem cell populations exhibit a gradual increase in heterogeneity in functional assays during organismal aging. Aged HSCs exhibit a broader range of functionalities than young HSCs.102 In the hippocampus, NSCs manifest increases in phenotypic and functional heterogeneity with aging, exhibiting marked changes in morphology.103 NSCs in the SVZ are heterogeneous, both in terms of cellular transcriptome and spatial subregions, and this heterogeneity is linked to different progeny fates.104,105 Single-cell RNA-seq studies have uncovered changes in NSC heterogeneity at the transcriptome during aging,106,107 although it is unclear whether this leads to functional heterogeneity.
Paradoxically, the acquisition of genomic mutations can ultimately result in a decrease in stem cell population heterogeneity.108 In the human hematopoietic system, this was established by examining peripheral blood production via deep sequencing and determining clonal contribution. In young individuals, thousands of stem cells are contributing to blood production at any given time. However, in aged individuals, there is a dramatic collapse, such that the majority of blood is being sustained by only a few clones.109 The factors that lead to the collapse of heterogeneity are not well understood. Likely, a combination of attrition of some stem cells (caused by somatic mutations or accumulation of other age-related damage) and enhanced contributions of other stem cells due to the acquisition of somatic mutations (or possibly epimutations), which confer superior activity on these cells, are underlying causes. Some mutations, such as those affecting the DNMT3A gene, generally enhance stem cell fitness and result in incremental but steadily increased contributions to blood production over time,110 whereas other mutations confer enhanced stem cell function primarily in an aged environment.109 How these mutation lead to “super” stem cells is not completely understood, and likely varies among somatic mutations.42 Experimentally, mutations in some epigenetic regulators, such as DNMT3A and TET2, enhance stem cell self-renewal, thus leading to a larger pool of HSCs that can disproportionately contribute to blood production. Many other genes, including genes in DNA damage response pathways, are also drivers of CH, and the consequences of these mutations likewise enhance the competitive advantage of those clones in ways distinct from epigenetic regulators.92,93,111,112
CH is not simply a marker of aging; it seems to contribute to multiple age-associated conditions. Several CH-associated genes are linked to hematologic disorders. Accordingly, the risk of developing hematologic malignancies is increased in the context of CH.68,113 Importantly, CH is also associated with an elevated risk for some non-hematologic conditions, particularly cardiovascular disease. This is thought to be due to an increased inflammatory environment promoted by the large CH clones,114,115,116,117,118 but detailed mechanisms are still unclear. CH has also been implicated in protection against some Alzheimer’s pathologies,116 and there is still more work needed to understand the broader effects on healthy aging.116
Age-associated clonal evolution that leads to loss of heterogeneity is evident in many tissues, for example, in human sun-exposed skin.119 Among the genes that are commonly mutated (driving clonal expansions) are those in the Notch signaling cell pathway, a key driver of malignant transformation of skin cells in cancers, such as squamous cell carcinoma.120 Similar clonal expansion associated with Notch (and other) mutations was observed the in epithelium of the esophagus.121 Mutations in TP53, a critical tumor suppressor in most mammalian tissues, are also commonly found in expanded clones in many tissues. The prevalence of expanded clones with TP53 and other mutations undoubtedly contribute to the increased rate of cancer with age.
In the intestine, the actively proliferating stem cells continuously compete for space within the stem cell niche in a process referred to as “neutral drift.122,123” This process can arise from cell competition driven by somatic mutations, but happens even in the absences of mutations, and results in a reduction of clonal heterogeneity with age. ISCs exhibit an age-related reduction in the expression of genes associated with cell adhesion, thus accelerating neutral drift.124 Intriguingly, during homeostatic aging, MuSCs maintain clonal diversity, with loss of that diversity observed only in response to repeated bouts of muscle injury and regeneration.125
The accumulation of somatic mutations in tissues is universal, as DNA damage is constantly acquired even in post-mitotic tissue, and not all DNA is repaired perfectly; some mutations inevitably become fixed.126 The extent to which accumulation of mutations per se contributes to aging, or just leads to altered stem cell and tissue function, is an important question for future studies.
Interventions to rejuvenate aged stem cells

Features of stem cell aging provide an interesting contrast to the aging of other cells in the body, particularly post-mitotic cells. Whereas most, if not all, of the drivers of tissue aging are likely to affect stem cells as well, it may be that stem cells are uniquely resistant or uniquely sensitive to certain intrinsic and extrinsic stresses. Interventions that may delay or even reverse the impact of aging on cells and tissues receive considerable interest from scientific and lay communities alike. It is therefore interesting to consider how such interventions might target stem cells specifically. Within a framework of hallmarks of stem cell aging, the ability to rejuvenate aged stem cells may predict which interventions are likely to offer the greatest benefits for organismal health. Below, we highlight several interventions that have been studied in the context of stem cell aging and rejuvenation, although in most cases it is not possible to discern whether the beneficial effects arise from direct actions on stem cells or indirectly via the stem cell niches.
Systemic factors

Initial studies that modulated systemic factors to enhance aged stem cell function performed using heterochronic parabiosis and transfusion of young plasma into aged mice.127 The initial heterochronic parabiosis studies of stem cell rejuvenation demonstrated enhanced function of aged MuSCs, improvements in survival, and cell fate changes.59,128 These studies also suggested a change in the state of cellular quiescence, with an acceleration of quiescent MuSC entry into the cell cycle.59,128 A subsequent study of NSCs revealed increased neurogenesis after transferring young plasma into old mice.129 This increase most likely indicates a shallower depth of quiescence given the increased entry of NSCs into the cell cycle. Single-cell RNA-seq studies have also confirmed the sensitivity of old NSCs to heterochronic parabiosis.130 Over the years, many studies have revealed similar effects of young system factors on other aged stem/progenitor cell populations,131 typically with an enhancement of proliferation or restoration of differentiation potential as the main readouts. Recently, single-cell RNA-seq analysis suggested that HSCs may be responsive to the rejuvenating effects of heterochronic parabiosis,132 although there are conflicting data on this point.133 The single-cell RNA-seq data supported the idea that youthful systemic factors revert the differentiation potential of aged HSC to that of younger animals.132
In addition to promoting rejuvenation with youthful systemic factors, approaches that block systemic pro-aging factors may be of value. A number of inflammatory cytokines increase with age that affect stem cell function.41,129 Recently, interleukin-11 (IL-11) was found at high levels in the serum of aged mice, and blocking with an antibody ameliorated multiple aging-associated effects and extended lifespan.134 The extent to which this has an effect on stem cell function remains to be determined.
CR/fasting

Among the most-studied dietary interventions with regard to aging benefits are caloric restriction (CR) and fasting.135,136 CR is more complex because of the many variables (extent and duration of restriction, composition of the diet, etc.) that make comparisons of different studies challenging. HSCs from aged mice on 30% CR have demonstrated increased quiescence, resilience, and regenerative potential and a restoration of youthful differentiation trajectories.137 The effects of CR on aged MuSCs is less clear, and both beneficial and detrimental effects have been reported.138,139 In the intestine, CR increases ISC numbers by upregulating sirtuin, SIRT1, and promotes ISC differentiation via 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A synthetase 2 (HMGCS2).140,141 In the brain, the effect of CR on NSCs is variable and may depend on the specific CR regimen and duration. For example, a 40% reduction in food intake for 6 months does not enhance proliferation of aged NSCs in the SVZ but does prevent the age-dependent decline in neurogenesis,142 possibly by decreasing inflammation. Moreover, a 40% reduction in food intake for 12 months also prevents the age-dependent decrease in NSCs and their progenitors in the hippocampus.143 However, intermittent fasting for 1 month is not sufficient to counter the age-dependent decline in NSCs in the hippocampus.144 CR increases quiescence and the repopulation potential of aged HSCs and prevents the age-related increase of HSC numbers, while impairing differentiation along the lymphoid lineage.145
Fasting is somewhat more straightforward to study because the main variable is duration. A 24-h fast promotes intestinal regeneration in aged mice by enhancing the self-renewal potential of aged ISCs.146 This beneficial effect is mediated by inducing a metabolic program of FAO in the ISCs, a process that is mediated by the rate limiting enzyme in FAO, Cpt1a.146 Fasting benefits aged MuSCs as well. The induction of the ketone body β-hydroxy butyrate (BHB) in the serum by fasting enhances the resilience of MuSCs in aged mice.147 This effect is due to a direct effect of BHB on MuSCs since ex vivo treatment leads to increased survival of aged MuSCs in transplantation studies.147 Intermittent fasting restores youthful differentiation potential to aged oligodendrocyte progenitors (OPCs).148 A regimen that mimics aspects of CR (intermittent fasting/re-feeding) leads to increased proliferation in the hippocampus, which may be due to the re-feeding phase.149
Exercise

Some of the earliest evidence of the benefits of exercise on the function of aged stem cells came from studies of neurogenesis. Voluntary wheel running increases the proliferation and survival of NSCs in the dentate gyrus.150 Transfer of plasma from exercised mice to non-exercised mice likewise increases NSC proliferation,151,152 suggesting that blood-borne factors mediate the effects of exercise on neurogenesis. Within the hematopoietic system, exercise increases HSC quiescence and reverses age-related changes in HSC differentiation potential, with corresponding changes in the transcriptome and epigenome.153 With age, MuSCs exhibit a decrease in cyclin D1 expression and a corresponding slowing of activation out of quiescence.154 Exercise restores youthful levels of cyclin D1 to aged MuSCs, enhances their activation, and promotes aged muscle repair. As with NSCs, transfer of plasma from exercised, aged mice to non-exercised aged mice increases cyclin D1 levels and youthful activation of aged MuSCs.154 In a single-cell RNA-seq study of young and aged NSCs, MuSCs, and HSCs and their corresponding niches, exercise reverses age-related inflammatory signals in the niches and restores youthful molecular signatures in the stem cell compartments.84 Both single-cell-specific aging clocks (machine learning models that predict age based on single-cell data) as well as spatial aging clocks (machine learning models that predict age based on spatial transcriptomic data) confirm the rejuvenating effect of exercise on the NSC lineage.130,155
Drug and metabolite treatments

A wide variety of drugs has been shown to slow the aging process, manifested as an extension of lifespan,156 but few of these have been shown to exert their beneficial effects via actions on stem cells. Among the many age-modifying drugs that have been studied, the few that have been tested in assays of stem cell function and tissue regeneration in aged animals include rapamycin and metformin.
Rapamycin, an inhibitor of mTOR, restores competitive repopulation activity to aged HSCs,157 consistent with the increase in mTOR activity in HSCs with age. While there has been a lot of interest in the lay media for using rapamycin as a general anti-aging drug, not all the data are uniformly positive and side effects can be limiting.158 Metformin, an activator of the AMPK pathway used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes, restores the molecular signature and differentiation potential of aged OPCs, thus enhancing remyelination in aged rats subjected to experimentally induced demyelination in the brain of aged rats.148 Metformin also promotes NSC proliferation and self-renewal by increasing levels of the transcription factor Tap73, a member of the p53 family.159
Metformin has also been implicated in impacting CH, an intrinsically stem cell-driven aging phenomenon. Examination of samples from the UK Biobank showed that individuals taking metformin as an anti-diabetic treatment showed lower levels of DNMT3A-associated CH.160 This result was linked to oxidative phosphorylation, and inhibition of mitochondrial electron transport blocked the effects.161 Moreover, a mouse model demonstrated that other drugs that blocked mitochondrial electron transport, such as MitoQ,162 could also abrogate the effect of Dnmt3a-mutations on HSC expansion. The broader implications for aging are still unknown, but these studies point to an important role for metformin and mitochondria in HSC aging.
Several studies have shown that treatment of mice with a small molecule inhibitor of the RhoGTPase Cdc42 results in rejuvenation of different stem cell populations. This inhibitor, Cdc42 activity-specific inhibitor (CASIN), restores canonical Wnt signaling and youthful function in HFSCs.163 Likewise, inhibition of Cdc42 enhances aged ISC function and restores crypt regeneration activity; Cdc42 also enhances HSC transplantation efficacy.164,165 Pharmacological inhibition of Thrombospondin/CD47 signaling or enhancement of prostaglandin signaling both restore youthful function to aged MuSCs.166,167
In addition to drugs, metabolites that may mimic the effects of either diet or exercise have been tested in studies of improvements of aged stem cells. Nicotinamide riboside (NR), a precursor of NAD which declines with age,168 restores ISC numbers in aged mice and reverses the age-related decline in ISC functions.169 Likewise, NR supplementation increases HSC compartments in aged mice and improves survival after HSC transplantation by improving mitochondrial function.170,171 Repletion of NAD with NR leads to variable enhancement of functions of MuSCs, NSCs, and McSCs.172 The ability of metabolites to restore youthful function to aged stem cells is likely related to the key role these molecules play in determining the epigenetic status of cells as co-factors in epigenetic regulators.173,174
Partial reprogramming

There is much interest in the potential of partial reprogramming using Yamanaka factors (Oct3/4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc [OSKM]) to restore youthful properties to aged cells throughout the body.175 This approach to rejuvenation is based on the notion that the dedifferentiation potential can be uncoupled from the rejuvenation potential of OSKM factors.176 The extent to which partial reprogramming impacts somatic stem cells, either directly or indirectly, has not been widely studied. Whole-body partial reprogramming enhances the regeneration of pancreas and muscle,177 and more regional or cell-specific reprogramming enhances the regeneration of muscle and the regrowth of axons in the visual system after injuries.178,179 However, in the cited studies there was no direct evidence of reprogramming of stem cells. Such whole-body reprogramming appeared to have negligible effects on middle-aged neural stem or progenitor cells in the hippocampus, but did enhance the migration of NSC progeny in both young and middle-aged mice.180 In the SVZ, whole-body reprogramming as well as SVZ-targeted reprogramming could restore neural progenitor cell number and the generation of new neurons in the olfactory bulb.181 Transient expression of reprogramming factors in vitro was shown to restore youthful properties to aged MuSCs from both mice and humans.182
Concluding remarks

The field of stem cell aging has progressed rapidly and in parallel with remarkable advances in the broader field of the biology of aging. The phenotypic characteristics of impaired regeneration of injured tissue in older individuals is now understood at the level of stem cell function and the environment in which those stem cells engage in tissue repair. Although this review has focused on the hallmarks of stem cell aging, age-related changes in the local and systemic environments and the immune system clearly play critical roles in all regenerative processes.
One of the challenges in the study of stem cell aging is the absence of a molecular definition of cellular age. Even as biomarkers, including various “aging clocks,” are used to assess the biological age of somatic cells,130,183 it is unclear how these record the age of the cell per se. Recent studies have revealed that stem cells may age at a different rate compared with the tissues in which they reside.184 As such, it may be necessary to develop biomarkers of aging that are specific to the stem cell population under consideration and that may record differences in cellular age between differentiated cells and stem cells. Such an approach may be useful when developing aging interventions targeted toward stem cells that can replenish somatic tissues.
The absence of clear molecular determinants of cellular age makes it difficult to assess the aging of the cells and their “rejuvenation.” As described above, there are many interventions and treatments that restore youthful properties to aged stem cells, but the extent to which any of these are true rejuvenations will depend on the molecular and functional characteristics that define a young stem cell. So far, a commonly used assessment for stem cell function across compartments is a stem cell’s ability to proliferate and differentiate, which has been traditionally measured by incorporation of base analogs, lineage tracing, and marker analysis. Current challenges and opportunities in this area include the development of sophisticated in vivo imaging methods to visualize stem cell dynamic directly in a tissue185,186 and artificial intelligence approaches. The emergence of artificial intelligence provides the opportunity to build foundation models for stem cells and more generalizable aging clocks, including spatial aging clocks,155 or clocks based on modalities other than transcriptomics (e.g., proteomics, metabolomics, image-based, etc.). Such machine learning models, particularly if trained on stem cell function, should be particularly powerful at identifying rejuvenation approaches for stem cells across tissues and species.
Finally, as aged stem cells may be functionally enhanced without conversion back to a youthful molecular state, the molecular underpinnings of rejuvenation interventions, and the value of aging clocks in evaluating these interventions will be essential to understand. It will also be interesting to determine the durability of rejuvenating interventions, whether they can permanently enhance stem cell function, and the overall impact they have on the tissue and organism.